
Sparklis is a query builder in natural language that allows people to
explore and query SPARQL endpoints with all the power of SPARQL and
without any knowledge of SPARQL.

Sparklis is a Web client running entirely in the browser. It directly
connects to SPARQL endpoints to retrieve query results and suggested
query elements. It covers a large subset of SPARQL 1.1 SELECT queries:
basic graph patterns including cycles, UNION, OPTIONAL, NOT EXISTS,
FILTER, BIND, complex expressions, aggregations, GROUP BY, ORDER
BY. All those features can be combined in a flexible way, like in
SPARQL. Results are presented as tables, and also on maps. A
configuration panel offers a few configuration options to adapt to
different endpoints (e.g., GET/POST, labelling properties and language
tags). Sparklis also includes the YASGUI editor to let advanced users
access and modify the SPARQL translation of the query.

On the "Examples" page there are 100+ example queries over several
datasets, and a number of them have a YouTube screencast to show how
they are built.

Sparklis reconciles expressivity and usability in semantic search by
tightly combining a Query Builder, a Natural Language Interface, and a
Faceted Search system. As a Query Builder it lets users build complex
queries by composing elementary queries in an incremental fashion. An
elementary query can be a class (e.g., "a film"), a property (e.g.,
"that has a director"), a RDF node (e.g., "Tim Burton"), a reference
to another node (e.g., "the film"), or an operator (e.g., "not", "or",
"highest-to-lowest", "+", "average").

As a Faceted Search system, at every step, the query under
construction is well-formed, query results are computed and displayed,
and the suggested query elements are derived from actual data - not
only from schema - so as to prevent the construction of non-sensical
or empty results. The display of results and data-relevant suggestions
at every step provides constant and acurate feedback to users during
the construction process. This supports exploratory search,
serendipity, and confidence about final results.

As a Natural Language Interface, everything presented to users -
queries, suggested query elements, and results - are verbalized in
natural language, completely hidding SPARQL behind the user
interface. Compared to Query Answering (QA) systems, the hard problem
of spontaneous NL understanding is avoided by controlling query
formulation through guided query construction, and replaced by the
simpler problem of NL generation. The user interface lends itself to
multilinguality, and is so far available in English, French, and
Spanish.

Author: Sébastien Ferré <http://people.irisa.fr/Sebastien.Ferre/>

Affiliation: Univ. Rennes 1, team SemLIS at IRISA <http://www-semlis.irisa.fr/>

Copyright © 2013 Sébastien Ferré, IRISA, Université de Rennes 1, France

Licence: Apache Licence 2.0

Online application: <http://www.irisa.fr/LIS/ferre/sparklis/>

Source repository: <https://bitbucket.org/sebferre/sparklis/src/master>
